Assignment(Distribution)
Q1.Simulate 30 rolls with =RANDBETWEEN(1,6). What is the probability of rolling a 3 exactly 5 times? 
   (Hint: Use BINOM.DIST)

SOL:-This is a classic binomial probability problem.
You’re rolling a fair die 30 times, and:
 Probability of getting a 3 on any roll = p=1/6
 Number of trials = n=30
 Desired successes = k=5
The probability is given by the binomial formula:
P(X=5) = (30/5) (1/6)^5(5/6)^25
Excel Solution
Using Excel, you can compute this directly with:
=BINOM.DIST(5, 30, 1/6, FALSE)
Final Answer (approx.)
P(X=5)≈0.19
So, there’s about a 19% chance of rolling exactly five 3s in 30 rolls.

Q2.Generate 100 values in Excel using the continuous uniform distribution RAND() and plot a histogram.
   Describe the shape of the distribution.

SOL:-1. Generate 100 random values

In Excel:
In cell A1, type:
=RAND()
Drag this formula down to A100.
This gives you 100 values from a continuous uniform distribution between 0 and 1.

2. Create a histogram
Option 1 (quick way):
  1.Select cells A1:A100
  2.Go to Insert → Charts → Histogram
  3.Excel will automatically group values into bins
Option 2 (more control):
  1.Create bin values (e.g., 0, 0.1, 0.2, …, 1)
  2.Use Data → Data Analysis → Histogram
  3.Select your data and bin range

3. Shape of the distribution
The histogram should look:
 1.Roughly flat (rectangular)
 2.No peak or skew
 3.Bars of similar height across all intervals
Why?
Because RAND() generates values uniformly, meaning: 

1.Every number between 0 and 1 is equally likely
2.So frequencies are evenly spread across bins

Final Description 
The histogram is approximately uniform in shape, with bars of similar height across the range from 0 to 1. This indicates that all values are equally likely, which is consistent with a continuous uniform distribution.

Q3.A dataset has a mean of 50 and a standard deviation of 5. What percentage of values lie between 45 and
   55 if the data follows a normal distribution?

SOL:-is is a standard normal distribution question.

Mean μ=50
Standard deviation σ=5
Interval: 45 to 55

Step 1: Convert to Z-scores
Z=X−μ/σ

FOR 45: Z= 45-50/5 =-1
FOR 55: Z= 55-50/5 =1

Step 2: Use the Empirical Rule
In a normal distribution:
About 68% of values lie within ±1 standard deviation of the mean

Final Answer
68%
So, approximately 68% of the values lie between 45 and 55.
	

Q4.What is the concept of standardization (z-score), and why is it important in data analysis? Explain the
formula and how standardization transforms a dataset.

SOL:-Standardization (z-score) is a way to transform data so that it’s expressed in terms of how far each value is from the mean, measured in units of standard deviation.
Z=X−μ/σ
Where:
X = original data value
μ = mean of the dataset
σ = standard deviation
z = standardized value (z-score)

What it means

A z-score tells you how many standard deviations a value is from the mean:
z=0: exactly at the mean
z=+1: one standard deviation above the mean
z=−2: two standard deviations below the mean

How standardization transforms data

When you standardize a dataset:
 The new mean becomes 0
 The new standard deviation becomes 1
 The shape of the distribution stays the same (just rescaled)
So you’re not changing the pattern—just putting everything on a common scale.

Why it’s important
1. Makes data comparable
If two datasets have different units (e.g., test scores vs heights), z-scores allow direct comparison.
2. Identifies outliers
Extreme z-scores (like ±3 or more) often indicate unusual values.
3. Essential for many statistical methods
Used in:
Normal distribution probabilities
Hypothesis testing
Machine learning algorithms (many models perform better with standardized data)
4. Simplifies probability calculations
Standardization lets you use standard normal tables or functions instead of recalculating each time.

Q5.What is Kurtosis and their type?

SOL:-Kurtosis is a statistical measure that describes the shape of a distribution, specifically how heavy or light the tails are compared to a normal distribution. It also reflects how sharply peaked the distribution is.
Key Idea
 It tells you about extreme values (outliers)
 Higher kurtosis → more extreme values
 Lower kurtosis → fewer extreme values

Types of Kurtosis
1. Mesokurtic (Normal kurtosis)
 Example: Normal distribution
 Kurtosis ≈ 3 (or excess kurtosis = 0)
 Moderate tails and peak

2. Leptokurtic
 Kurtosis > 3 (excess kurtosis > 0)
 Sharper peak and heavier tails
 More prone to outliers

3. Platykurtic
 Kurtosis < 3 (excess kurtosis < 0)
 Flatter peak and lighter tails
 Fewer extreme values

| Type        | Shape       | Tails    | Outliers |
| ----------- | ----------- | -------- | -------- |
| Mesokurtic  | Normal peak | Moderate | Normal   |
| Leptokurtic | Sharp peak  | Heavy    | More     |
| Platykurtic | Flat peak   | Light    | Fewer    |

Why Kurtosis Matters
 Helps understand risk and variability (especially in finance)
 Identifies likelihood of extreme events
 Useful in data modeling and distribution analysis

Simple Intuition
 Leptokurtic → “peaky with surprises”
 Platykurtic → “flat and predictable”

Q6.Explain why the uniform distribution is a good model for the outcome of rolling a fair die.

SOL:-A uniform distribution is appropriate when all outcomes are equally likely, which is exactly the case for a fair die.

1. Equal probability of outcomes

A fair six-sided die has outcomes:
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
Each outcome has probability:
           P(X=x)= 1/6, x=1,2,3,4,5,6
This matches a discrete uniform distribution, where every value in the set has the same probability.

2. No bias or preference
A die is considered fair if:
 It is symmetric
 Each face has an equal chance of landing face up
So there’s no skewness or weighting toward any number, which is exactly the assumption behind a uniform distribution.

3. Matches the definition of uniform distribution
A discrete uniform distribution means:
  All possible outcomes in a finite set occur with equal probability.
A fair die satisfies this perfectly.

4. Predictable long-term behavior
If you roll the die many times:
  Each number appears about 1/6 of the time
  The frequencies even out over large samples (law of large numbers)

5. Simple and useful model
Using a uniform distribution allows us to:
 Easily compute probabilities
 Build simulations (like in Excel using RANDBETWEEN(1,6))
 Model random processes accurately

Final intuition
A fair die is like a perfectly balanced system where no outcome is favored, so the most natural and accurate model is a uniform distribution.

Q7.Use Excel to compute the probability of getting at least 8 successes in 15 trials with success probability 0.5

SOL:-This is a binomial probability problem:
 Number of trials: n=15
 Probability of success: p=0.5
 We want: P(X≥8)
Why this works:
 BINOM.DIST(7, 15, 0.5, TRUE) gives P(X≤7)
  SO:-
  P(X≥8)=1−P(X≤7)
Final Answer (approx.)
P(X≥8)≈0.50

Since p=0.5, the distribution is symmetric around 7.5, so:
Getting 8 or more successes is almost exactly half the probability.

Q8.How does log transformation help in stabilizing variance and making data more normally distributed?

SOL:-Log transformation is a technique where you replace each value X with log(X) (often natural log or base-10 log). It’s widely used when data is skewed or when variability increases with the size of the values.

1. Stabilizing variance
In many real datasets (e.g., income, population, sales), the spread of values increases as the mean increases. This is called heteroscedasticity.
What log transformation does:
 Compresses large values more than small ones
 Reduces the gap between high and low values
Result:
 Variance becomes more constant across the dataset
 Makes the data better suited for statistical methods that assume equal variance

2. Making data more normally distributed
Many datasets are right-skewed (long tail to the right).
Log transformation:
 Pulls in the long right tail
 Reduces skewness
 Makes the distribution more symmetric

3. Intuition
Think of it this way:
 Original scale: differences are absolute
 Log scale: differences become relative (percentage-based)
Example:
 Increase from 10 → 100 (huge jump)
 After log: difference becomes much smaller
So extreme values stop dominating the distribution.

4. When it works best
Log transformation is useful when:
 Data is positively skewed
 Variance increases with the mean
 Relationships are multiplicative (e.g., growth rates)

5. Important notes
 Only works for positive values (you can’t take log of zero or negative numbers directly)
 Sometimes a small constant is added: log(X+1)

Final takeaway
Log transformation helps by:
 Reducing skewness → makes data closer to normal
 Stabilizing variance → makes spread more consistent
This improves the performance and validity of many statistical analyses.